My name is Aroudeini Ismaghil.
Myself, I’m a noble from Bankilare a resident of Iguirer.
Bankilare is located Northwest of Tera, 65km from Tera, just before Dolbel, near the border with Mali in the Tillaberi Department.
I speak the Tawellemmet language.
I’m a descendent of the Iwellimmiden, the Tuaregs that are of the right bank of the River (in Niger).
This language is not only spoken on the right bank it is also spoken elsewhere.
It is also spoken in other locations like the Azawak, between Menaka, towards Anderboukane, towards Tchinta, and all the way to Abalak.
That which has brought me to do music in the first place: I’m someone that is very interested in music.
This passion for music is what drove me to start playing the guitar.
The guitar is one of the instruments that is a legacy of the Tuaregs.
I noticed that my ancestors had a strong passion for music.
Secondly it is using music that my people can develop itself in order to raise up our rights, everything that is needed to develop.
These are the reasons that justify using the guitar.
These are the same reasons that pushed me to learn the guitar and singing.
It is one of the instruments that I like a lot among all others, I spread the message everywhere, especially the hardships that my society suffers.
This is the reason that I pick up the guitar to play.
Thirdly, for me to play the guitar, it is the best instrument to use for my brothers, those older than me, and my community.
It is the principal tool used to express the different pains of our society.
These are the reasons that I took up the guitar.
My passion for music has allowed me to work now for private radio, Radio Fidelite which allows my message to be carried out farther so it will be heard by all.
Concerning my songs, they are difficult to come up with.
The songs that I write are made up of things that happened in real-life experiences, That I’ve seen in my life.
It’s when I see something has happened that I write a song.
I write it, I look for how to get a song that will go along with it, how to get something that pleases me, this is the way I write my songs.
That’s why you will see in my songs, You will hear the song that is dedicated to my friend that I had spoken about.
My friend is a man with whom, we liked each other a lot, we were always together even in our songs, we were always together.
We made our songs until the day where in the early morning death took him away.
He left me, death took him. This really affected me a lot.
Now I am missing him, rest his soul.
(I thought) what to do since we were always together until the idea to write a song for him came to me.
So that I can always be reminded of him.
That’s why I dedicated a song for him called “my friend.”
You have left, left for good.
You have left me with nothing but memories,
That are hidden in many songs,
That I have made throughout many experiences in my life,
That I have seen with my own eyes, that have happened in real life before me, that has affected me.
That’s why I had the idea to write them.
It became a story that I transformed into a song.
This the way that I create my songs, the way that I arrange my life, I would like that every time I make a song, it becomes something,
That if you listen to it, you will know that it is something that I experienced in life, That I have seen myself that maybe tomorrow you too will see it come up in your life.
You will then be careful about what I have said in my song so that you will do the same things for yourself.
To be aware of that.
That is how I would like you to understand the way that I write my songs.