I would like to tell you how I grew up in this country.
How I became a singer.
Myself, I’m not a singer, I didn’t inherit songs from our family.
Neither, back in the day, in our village.
All young men would play this kuuntigiiru that you see here.
Some Fulani call it a kuntigi some people call is mooliyaaru.
The Fulani in Mali call it “jurkele.”
Ok, so this is what we were used to, during the full moon, when the Fulani will even say, “look there at the full moon.”
During the full moon, it’s the time for enjoying oneself.
During the full moon, the young girls and boys come out and play the kuntigi, playing calabashes, playing the flute, singing and dancing.
That’s how I learned to play kuntigi you see.
I started playing since the European year 1976, (that’s when) I started the kuntigi.
Myself, I am 55 years old.
55 years old, I’m no child, only God knows one’s destiny.
I’m not young, I’m an adult, a grown man.
So, I started playing the kuntigi from my childhood in all truth.
Ever since the European year known as 1976, I started playing the kuntigi.
Yea, we used to have regular parties.
Also, it was a time when people were not very likely to be hypocritical, nor likely to be hateful.
They were working all the time, everyone would come together, all would share in the joy.
We the Fulani, with the Songhai, we lived together.
This is the reason that as for me, my mother is Fulani and my father was Songhai.
So you see, I am half Fulani and half Songhai. If it were not that the Fulani and Zarma were living together, this would never be possible.
You understand right?
A Fulani (man) would never marry a Songhai, the Songhai are agriculturalists.
And when we talk about agriculturalists we are talking about (millet) porridge.
And when you say porridge, you will talk about milk.
The milk must be added to the porridge otherwise it’s not good, so that it (becomes) delicious for the tongue.
Do you understand?
It’s only when a herder takes the animals to pasture that he’ll get milk, he’ll get butter, that will be added to a meal to eat, it’s only like this that we can called a meal delicious.
Yea, this is why the Fulani and the ZarmaSonghai live together, they come together in the evening to relax together.
So, this where the Fulani song that you heard me sing comes from.
That is also where the Songhai song that I sang comes from too.
Also, when I was younger, in my childhood, I did not understand Songhai at all, God has said to speak the truth.
I didn’t understand any Songhai at all; I could only understand Fulfulde.
This is why even though there are many Songhai songs, I couldn’t sing them because I couldn’t understand what they were saying.
So, today I understand Songhai-Zarma, I understand Fulfulde, I am Fulani and I am Zarma.
Ok, I’ll stop my talk there. May peace be to the prophet Muhamed.
Have a good day.
So, this lute that you see in my hands, some call it kuntigi others call it mooliyarou.
The Fulani in Mali call it jourkele.
In terms of how to make it, I will talk about back in the day, not about today.
Back then, we take a small calabash, then we cover it with cowhide.
The cow hide that is used is the part that is by the udders, that’s where the skin is not so hard.
This is the part of the skin that isn’t too hard, which is what allows one to use it for the mooliyaaru like you see.
That is what we cut, what we cover over the calabash, then we use a stick and we would find a string.
Back then, not today, I’m telling you clearly!
Back then, it wasn’t a fishing line or string either, back then we would sometimes use something like a case.
Sometimes we would use a case.
Yea, today, you see this one, we have even put…we could say that it’s westernized, this type didn’t exist before.
Now, you just take a piece of leather, you attach it to a case, you tie it underneath, you understand, and you start playing it.
A calabash, it breaks very easily.
Ok, it’s not very resistant!
We found that these cans called “booteeji” or “kommbisiiji,” are sardine cans that are metallic.
The metal is longer lasting that the calabash, the metal doesn’t break easily, the calabash breaks easily.
Since we started finding metal, we were able to use it to make our lute, we found that it’s good and practical, it sounds good and it’s good-looking.
So, this is why we no longer make it with leather (from a cow’s udder) and a calabash, we make it using metal, with sardine cans, that we call “kombissi.”
We put in the stick, there also, pulling the (plastic) string becomes easier, because when you use the leather strap (to hold the string in place), when you pull them, it doesn’t stretch.
Every time you pull to get to the length you need, it loosens up, it goes back to the same place (you started) which you don’t want.
Ever since we found this mechanic from the Europeans, ever since we found that, we have seen that pulling the string is more effective (this way).
Because (otherwise) just as you pull it well, it falls back and does not hold…so that’s why we changed it and we use the mechanical piece from the Europeans.
To this day, I keep playing my little lute.
I will play a tune that’s called, ‘’Seygalâré’’.